{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Segoe UI Black;}{\f1\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}{\f2\fnil\fcharset0 Arial Black;}}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.19041}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b\f0\fs28\lang9 PILGRIMAGE\par
\b0\f1\fs24 This wonderful country called India is known to be the hub of religious and spiritual tourism. It is inhabited by people of several religious faiths. The country, thus houses various places of worship such as temples, mosques, gurudwaras, churches, mosques etc. A visit to these pilgrimage sites of India is truly a divine experience\par
\par
\b\f2\fs28 Rishikesh\par
\b0\f1\fs22 The path of enlightenment begins via religious scriptures leading to the places where God has supposed to have left foot prints of His divine presence. Considered sure shot to enlightening salvation devotees embark on holy journeys - Pilgrimage, eager to measure those footprints with theirs. One such place of eternal charm is in the state of Uttarakhand, festooned with mighty Himalayas, holy Ganges and other eloquent welcoming attributes of Mother Nature - Rishikesh.\par
 Rishikesh has also emerged as an international destination for Yoga, rightly assuming the title of 'World Capital of Yoga' and hence the thriving population of tourists from abroad.\par
\par
\b\fs28 Facts\b0\fs22\par
\b Best time to visit\b0 : Round the year\par
\b Altitude: \b0 372 mt.\par
\b Language\b0 : Hindi, English\par
\par
\b\fs28 Attractions\b0\fs22\par
Lakshman Jhula\par
Neelkanth Mahadev Mandir\par
Bharat Mandir\par
Shri Trimbakeshwar Temple\par
Triveni Ghat\par
Swarg Ashram\par
\par
\b\fs28 Getting there\b0\fs22\par
\b By Air: \b0 Flying to Jolly Grant Airport in Dehradun from New Delhi and Lucknow and taking road is the fastest way to reach Rishikesh.\par
\b By Train\b0 : Haridwar (24 km) is the nearest and convenient railway station connected very well by rest of the major cities of India.\par
\b By Road: \b0 People find it common to hire a car or taxi from New Delhi but the regular bus services from different towns and cities of India.\par
\par
\par
\par
\b\f2\fs28 Golden Temple, Amritsar\par
\b0\f1\fs22 Enclosed by a lake with dazzling water, Golden Temple is located in a city of Amritsar. It was erected in 1574 by Guru Arjan, the first Sikh Martyr. Shiny with 750 kg of pure gold, pleasant ambience and the sanctified crystal clear water are some of appealing features of the golden temple - the most famous sacred temple of Sikh in Amritsar. It is indeed a standing beauty of harmony and purity. Also hailed as Shri Harmandir Sahib, the beautiful temple also possesses many other small shrines in its premises. Paying a visit to this superb formation of Sikh religion will enable the devotees to scout unparalleled peace and calmness and will take you through mysterious holiness and ecstasy. From morning to evening, one can listen to the prayers getting echoing within the premises of the shrine. All this creates a wonderful atmosphere that one will love to experience repeatedly.\par
\par
\b\fs28 Best time to visit\b0\fs22\par
Though you can visit round the year, the time it remains packed with tons of travelers is from October to March.\par
\b\fs28\par
Getting there\par
\fs22 By Air\b0 : The nearest airport to reach Golden Temple is at Amritsar, about 15 km from city center. Raja Sansi International Airport offers a range of domestic as well international flights to the main cities of India and foreign countries connecting Punjab.\par
\b By Train\b0 : The charming city of Amritsar is well connected to the main cities of India by rail. One can take a taxi from the railway station to make it to the shrine.\b\par
By Road: \b0 Direct bus services are available from Delhi, Chandigarh, Jammu, Dharamshala and many other cities of India to Amritsar.\par
\par
\par
\par
\b\f2\fs28 Bodh Gaya\b0\f1\fs22\par
Mahabodhi TempleBodh Gaya is the ultimate destination for Buddhists followers and tourists. This is the place where the prince Siddhartha Gautama Buddha attained the supreme Enlightenment. He left his royal dynasty at the age of 29 years. Since then he wandered to various places and meditated for years to find solutions or remedies against the human sufferings and sorrow. Later, at Bodh Gaya, he was blessed with supreme enlightenment that answered his entire quests.\par
People from all walks of life visit the place at least once in their lifetime. Though it is the sacred Buddhist pilgrimage, but people from across the globe visit the place to offer prayers and receive blessings. Bodh Gaya is the most significant place among Kushinagar, Sarnath and Lumbini. Planning a tour to Bodh Gaya will be a pleasurable experience for anybody.\par
\par
\b\fs28 Facts about Bodh Gaya\b0\fs22\par
\b Best Time to Visit: \b0 October to March\par
\b Population: \b0 38434\par
\b STD Code\b0 : 0631\par
\b Language\b0 : Magadhi and Hindi\par
\par
\b\fs28 Attractions:\b0\fs22\par
This sacred place has many Buddhist monuments, temples and monasteries that reflect the historical and religious relevance of the place.\par
Bodhi TreeBodhi Tree\par
Bodhi Sarovar\par
Mahabodhi Temple\par
Durgeshwari Cave Temples\par
\b\fs28 Getting there\b0\fs22\par
\b By Air\b0 : Nearest domestic airport is at Gaya. However, many tourists prefer landing at Patna, which is 110kms away from Bodh Gaya. At Patna airport, flights from major cities such as Delhi, Mumbai, Bangalore, Chennai, etc., land on daily basis.\par
\b By Road\b0 : Long drive lovers can hire a luxury private taxi or private bus to reach the holy Buddhist place from Patna. Though, there are connecting roads also available from neighboring states and regions.\par
\b By Rail: \b0 The nearest railway station is at Gaya, just 17kms away from the sacred place. Three-wheelers, taxies and other mode of transportations are available that safely and quickly help tourists reach the destination.\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\b\f2\fs28 Varanasi\par
\b0\f1\fs22 The oldest city of the world', 'the religious capital of India', 'the city of lights', 'Kashi', 'Benaras', call it by any name but you would be connecting to One- Gangadhar (Keeper of Ganga, name used for Lord Shiva) as Vishwanath (Lord of the World) in Varanasi. The city is the paramount worship place for Hindus among all the other holy cities where they can plan their tour to carve a way to salvation starting with the darshan of Vishwanath Temple.\par
State of Uttar Pradesh is proud of its heritage, and Varanasi is part of this legacy with its unique culture and devotion to the Lord Shiva who is believed to be its founder. The name of the city finds its connection with the Rivers Varuna and Assi joining to form Varanasi. Many of the great scriptures, epics and works of art and music are credited to this place\par
\b\fs28\par
Facts\par
\b0\fs22 Best time to visit- Round the year\par
Language- Hindi\par
\par
\b\fs28 Attractions\b0\fs22\par
Kashi Vishvanath Temple\par
Ganga Ghats\par
Durga Temple\par
Gyan Vapi Kup\par
Ramgarh Fort\par
Sarnath\par
\par
\b\fs28 Getting there\b0\fs22\par
\b By Air : \b0 Varanasi has a domestic airport which connects to Delhi, Mumbai and Agra.\par
\b By Train : \b0 A major railhead, Varanasi is connected with most of the cities and towns of India.\par
\b By Road : \b0 Frequent bus services from anywhere in UP can easily take pilgrims to their destination in Varanasi. Various routes connect the place with other states as well.\par
\par
\par
\par
\b\f2\fs28\par
Dargah of Khwaja Moin-ud-din Chishti, Ajmer\par
\b0\f1\fs22 The Dargah of Khwaja Moin-ud-din Chishti is the most revered shrine of Muslims not only in Rajasthan, but in India also. The shrine is known as Ajmer Sharif, it encapsulates the mortal remains of the famous Sufi Saint Khwaja Moinuddin Chishti. Situated in the city of Ajmer in Rajasthan, this shrine is visited by people of all religions, cast and creed. The Dargah is a living example of Mughal Architecture and their faith. The daughter of Mughal emperor Shah Jahan had established a prayer room especially for the woman followers. It is believed that people who visit the shrine and pray with a pure heart and soul often get their wishes granted and with his blessing they will be free from desolation.\par
\par
\b\fs28 Facts about Hazratbal Dargah of Khwaja Moinuddin Chishti\b0\fs22\par
\b Best time to visit: \b0 September to March\par
\b Population: \b0 2,661,720\par
\b Languages: \b0 Hindi, English, Rajasthani\par
\b STD Code\b0 : 0145\par
\par
\b\fs28 Attractions:\b0\fs22\par
Adhai-din-ka Jhonpra\par
Ana Sagar Lake\par
Taragarh Fort\par
Pushkar\par
\par
\b\fs28 Getting there\b0\fs22\par
\b By Air\b0 : The nearest international airport is in Jaipur at a distance of 132km. A new airport has been inaugurated by the Prime Minister Mr. Manmohan Singh and it will commence its services from 2016.\par
\b By Rail\b0 : Ajmer has its own Railway station. It offers as a junction.\par
\b By Road\b0 : Ajmer is well connected by major cities in Rajasthan like Jaipur itself. It lies on the Golden Quadrilateral National Highway 8.\par
\par
\par
}
 